stumbling_on_happiness.md, before:

Unorganized

### Part one, prospection
"The human being is the only animal that thinks about the future" I really don't think so
Predicting the future is the human brains greatest achievement
Surprise happens when "nexting" is broken, can be observed and studied
The concept of *later* is important
Frontal lobe is used for planning, very large in humans
Can't plan without it
Thinking about the future is pleasurable, it's hard not to
Usually we are overly optimistic
Sometimes we imagine negative futures, these make the actually negative outcome less painful (study provided)
Also, bring able to anticipate the painful thing makes it less painful
Fear of the bad thing can help us motivate behaviour
Humans like to use prediction to control things
We act as though we can control things we can't (betting on dice that have been thrown be not)


### Part 2, subjectivity
Problem in situations that seem bad can still be happy
Different Types of happiness
Feeling happy, emotional happiness, hard to define because it's so basic, fleeting?
Remembering happiness is inaccurate, so comparing new happiness with remembered is risky
Happy is also used as a point of view (I'm happy this happened)
Happiness is subjective, so can't be compared between people
Also hard to compare past happiness, since remembering is inaccurate
Humans only notice change if they are focused on an aspect of something as it changes
People are changed by experiences, permanently changing their view of previous events. Once you learn to read you can't see letters as just squiggles
Experience stretching: the amount of happiness experienced is different for a single event if people/previous experiences are different (drinking water when thirsty vs not)
Claims of happiness are from someone's point of view, a single person with a context of past experiences


The response to a stimuli is happening as we are deciding exactly what it is ( wolverine is scary, which makes flight or fight response happen, before we know it is a wolverine)
Signals can get mixed (ex pg 63-64)
Feeling something and believing you are feeling it are different.
You can experience something workout being aware you did ( ex pg 65)
This is looking like meditation ideas
You are still retaining information when this happens (see blind sight)
Can also have feeling without being aware of them (numbfeel) a lack of introspection
Can't measure happiness perfect, but can't measure anything perfectly
Reported Measure  of happiness in the moment is most accurate

### Part 3, realism
Imagining what we would feel like in situations is important, and we are bad at it

Commit message:

started going over noted for stumbling on hapiness

stumbling_on_happiness.md, after:

### Part one, prospection
Humans plan for the future, a lot, and it is an important part of life   
When we plan, we are usually optimistic (unless you're depressed)   
Anticipating bad outcomes make them less painful   
Humans like to control things. Going as far as to act as though we can control things we can't   
The concept of *later* is important, but you can mostly function without it (frontal lobe damage)

### Part 2, subjectivity
There are different types of happiness (the word is used in different ways), we'll be talking about emotional happiness (feeling happy)   
When someone make a claim of happiness it's from someone's point of view, a single person with a context of past experiences   
Since people are changed by experiences, it permanently changes their view of previous events. Ex: Once you learn to read you can't see letters as just squiggles   
A bunch of stuff comes out of this

* Remembering happiness is inaccurate, since your point of view has changed (possibly of other reasons as well)
* So, __comparing new happiness with remembered is risky__. Also hard to compare different past happinesses to each other   
* People in situations that *you* think are bad can still be happy (their point of view is different)   

__Experience stretching hypothesis__: the amount of happiness experienced is different for a single event if people/previous experiences are different (drinking water when thirsty vs not)   
Humans only notice change if they are focused on an aspect of something as it changes   


The response to a stimuli is happening as we are deciding exactly what it is (wolverine is scary, which makes flight or fight response happen, before we know it is a wolverine)
Signals can get mixed (ex pg 63-64)
Feeling something and believing you are feeling it are different.
You can experience something workout being aware you did ( ex pg 65)
This is looking like meditation ideas
You are still retaining information when this happens (see blind sight)
Can also have feeling without being aware of them (numbfeel) a lack of introspection
Can't measure happiness perfect, but can't measure anything perfectly
Reported Measure  of happiness in the moment is most accurate

### Part 3, realism
Imagining what we would feel like in situations is important, and we are bad at it
