the_mind_illuminated.md, before:

# Notes on The Mind Illuminated
### By Culadasa (John Yates, PHD), Matthew Immergut, PHD and Jeremy Graves

## Table of Contents

[Overview of the Ten Stages](#overview-of-the-ten-stages)  
[First Interlude](#first-interlude)  
[Stage One](#stage-one)
[Stage Two](#stage-two)

## Abbreviations etc.
MV - Mind-Wandering  
ovc - Overcoming  
MO - Meditation Object  
PA - peripheral awareness

## Overview of the Ten Stages
* Stages represent building levels of skill
* You may be in multipe stages at once
* You may move through different stages over different day or throught a single sit
* Using skills you learn from meditation in your daily life will greatl speed progress

The rest of this chapter has an outline of each stage that is ver useful to look back on,
 but I wont include here.

## First Interlude

__Consciousness__: The sum of what we are experiencing. It consists of __attention__ and
__peripheral awareness__ which work together like visual focus and peripheral vision.

__Attention__: Picks an object from the field of consciousness and analyzes it. An example
is deciding whether the object lying on the road is a snake or rope.

__Stable Attention__ is reached when the attention is directed and focused, as opposed to:

* Scanning: focus moving around looking for something more interesting
* Getting captured: attention being captured by another stumulus
* Alternating: focus of attention quickly alternates between objects. Appears like multitasking
Can also be happening if something stands out from PA (you're writing an email and noticing
the cat meowing)

__Peripheral Awareness__: The general awareness of everything. It filters out information
it thinks in unimportant. It also profides quick reations that don't have time for analysis.

__Extrospective__ vs. __Introspective__: Extrospective means it is directed outside the the mind,
introspective means internal to the mind (thoughts, feeling etc.).

Attention and PA can be either of these, but only PA can observe the state of the mind as a whole
(can't pay attention to attention).

Attention and PA draw from the same source (consciousness), there must be a trade off.
Training attention and PA at the same time is what increases power of consciousness,

__Sustained Attention__: When stable attention is sustained.

Directing attention is not a conscious process. Need to train the unconscious to maintain sustained
attention.

__Example__  
Your partner has a bad day at work and complains about the food you made. It takes *mindfulness*
to to maintain an objective awareness and realize what the complainet is really about. It take
a more powerful consciousness to have the energy to deal with the strong emotions while
maintaining mindfulness.

## Stage One
### Establishing a Practice

Preparing for prectice:  
Go over these point before each sit.

* Motivation - Why you are meditating
* Goals - Set a direction for your practice. Use recent problems and the stage you are at to set
reasonable ones.
* Beware of expectations - Be careful about where you "should be", any sit is a good one if you
practice diligently.
* Commit to diligence - No point meditating if you aren't trying.

Four step tansition to meditation object:  
Use theis as part of the practice. Each step is an opportunity to distinguish between attention
and awareness at different scopes of focus. Always try to keep awareness open. If attention
moves away from the goal *gently* bring it back.

1. Focus on the present - Anything is good, as lng as it is in the present. Give priority to 
sensations over thoughts.
2. Focus on the body - Any sesation related to the body is good.
3. Bodily sensations related to the breath - Same as 2, but limited.
4. Breath at the nose - This is the MO

Expect to be aware of many other things as you focus on the breath, just don't engage.

__Emphasize relaxation, peacefulness and pleasure ranther than willpower and effort.__

Attitude: Don't slip into a judgemental, critiacal, striving attitude. Aiming to be free
from judgement and expectations. If you are feeling like you have to __struggle__ or it's
__difficult__ you probably need to examine your attitude.

You have mastered this stage when you never miss a daily practice excepts when comletely
unavoidable.

## Second Interlude
The mind has many processes and drives internaly that can be miscalibrated. This miscallibration
can cause problems (especially with internal drives) that lead to *the five hinderances*.
Meditation trains and emphasizes certain of these processes that help un move beyond these problems.

Keep in mind that these process are still useful. Laziness, adgitation etc. are useful.

Ex of problematic thinking: "I need" a beautiful home to be happy; "I hate" rude people; "I can't
take" this place anymore; "I'm not" good/fast/smat enough etc.

Not sure on unsefulness of catecories. See page 67 details on them.

5 hinderances lead to 7 problems. A useful table of the problems and their solutions is on pg 77.  
Thses problems are:

* Procrastination and resistance to training
* Distractions, forgetting
* Impatience
* Monkey-Mind
* Self-Doubt
* Dullness, drowsiness
* Phisical discomfort

## Stage Two
### Interrupted Attention and Overcoming Mind-Wandering

__Goal:__ To change from meditation being mostly mind-wandering, interrupted by brief attention, to
mostly attention to the breath with brief periodes of mind wandering.
(Shorten periodes of mind wandering, extend periodes of sustained attention).

The main method is: appreciate the *aha moment* when you realize the mind is wandering then *gently but firmly* redirect attention back to the
breath.

Redirection attention: Do this without self-judgement, make sure to apprecite the moment.
Becoming aware of MW isn't something *you* did, it's an unconsious process, train it.

Focusing on the breath: Try to notice the sesation of the start and end of each breath.

__Monkey Mind:__ When attention jumps around rapidly. This is simmilar to mind-wandering, but a faster/more adgitated state.
Expand your attention to your boy to overcome (return to step one or two of the 4 step transition).

__Forgetting:__ forgetting the MO as well as the intention to focus on the breath. Not dealt with at this stage

__Mind-Wandering:__ after we've forgotten the mind will wander between thoughts, until we "wake-up".

__Mindfulness__ is strong when attention is accompanied by greater awareness.

Distraction -> Forgetting -> Mind-Wandering -> "Wakeing Up" -> Attention -> Distraction...

Pg 86 for review

#### Other Notes

* You shouldn't be working hard (see above on attitude).
* Don't let peripheral awareness drop away. Allow sounds, sensations, __thoughts__ and feeling to continue in the background.
* In this stage breath doesn't need to be the center at attention, it is good enough to have it in the __field of consciousness__.
* Remember: the mind is a bunch of processes going on in parallel, there is no *you* to blame.
* Can use mental words/images to help with focusing on the breath, but let them fall away when they aren't necessary. This may take untill well into stage 4.

Commit message:

TMI, dealing with impatience, stage 2

the_mind_illuminated.md, after:

# Notes on The Mind Illuminated
### By Culadasa (John Yates, PHD), Matthew Immergut, PHD and Jeremy Graves

## Table of Contents

[Overview of the Ten Stages](#overview-of-the-ten-stages)  
[First Interlude](#first-interlude)  
[Stage One](#stage-one)
[Stage Two](#stage-two)

## Abbreviations etc.
MV - Mind-Wandering  
ovc - Overcoming  
MO - Meditation Object  
PA - peripheral awareness

## Overview of the Ten Stages
* Stages represent building levels of skill
* You may be in multipe stages at once
* You may move through different stages over different day or throught a single sit
* Using skills you learn from meditation in your daily life will greatl speed progress

The rest of this chapter has an outline of each stage that is ver useful to look back on,
 but I wont include here.

## First Interlude

__Consciousness__: The sum of what we are experiencing. It consists of __attention__ and
__peripheral awareness__ which work together like visual focus and peripheral vision.

__Attention__: Picks an object from the field of consciousness and analyzes it. An example
is deciding whether the object lying on the road is a snake or rope.

__Stable Attention__ is reached when the attention is directed and focused, as opposed to:

* Scanning: focus moving around looking for something more interesting
* Getting captured: attention being captured by another stumulus
* Alternating: focus of attention quickly alternates between objects. Appears like multitasking
Can also be happening if something stands out from PA (you're writing an email and noticing
the cat meowing)

__Peripheral Awareness__: The general awareness of everything. It filters out information
it thinks in unimportant. It also profides quick reations that don't have time for analysis.

__Extrospective__ vs. __Introspective__: Extrospective means it is directed outside the the mind,
introspective means internal to the mind (thoughts, feeling etc.).

Attention and PA can be either of these, but only PA can observe the state of the mind as a whole
(can't pay attention to attention).

Attention and PA draw from the same source (consciousness), there must be a trade off.
Training attention and PA at the same time is what increases power of consciousness,

__Sustained Attention__: When stable attention is sustained.

Directing attention is not a conscious process. Need to train the unconscious to maintain sustained
attention.

__Example__  
Your partner has a bad day at work and complains about the food you made. It takes *mindfulness*
to to maintain an objective awareness and realize what the complainet is really about. It take
a more powerful consciousness to have the energy to deal with the strong emotions while
maintaining mindfulness.

## Stage One
### Establishing a Practice

Preparing for prectice:  
Go over these point before each sit.

* Motivation - Why you are meditating
* Goals - Set a direction for your practice. Use recent problems and the stage you are at to set
reasonable ones.
* Beware of expectations - Be careful about where you "should be", any sit is a good one if you
practice diligently.
* Commit to diligence - No point meditating if you aren't trying.

Four step tansition to meditation object:  
Use theis as part of the practice. Each step is an opportunity to distinguish between attention
and awareness at different scopes of focus. Always try to keep awareness open. If attention
moves away from the goal *gently* bring it back.

1. Focus on the present - Anything is good, as lng as it is in the present. Give priority to 
sensations over thoughts.
2. Focus on the body - Any sesation related to the body is good.
3. Bodily sensations related to the breath - Same as 2, but limited.
4. Breath at the nose - This is the MO

Expect to be aware of many other things as you focus on the breath, just don't engage.

__Emphasize relaxation, peacefulness and pleasure ranther than willpower and effort.__

Attitude: Don't slip into a judgemental, critiacal, striving attitude. Aiming to be free
from judgement and expectations. If you are feeling like you have to __struggle__ or it's
__difficult__ you probably need to examine your attitude.

You have mastered this stage when you never miss a daily practice excepts when comletely
unavoidable.

## Second Interlude
The mind has many processes and drives internaly that can be miscalibrated. This miscallibration
can cause problems (especially with internal drives) that lead to *the five hinderances*.
Meditation trains and emphasizes certain of these processes that help un move beyond these problems.

Keep in mind that these process are still useful. Laziness, adgitation etc. are useful.

Ex of problematic thinking: "I need" a beautiful home to be happy; "I hate" rude people; "I can't
take" this place anymore; "I'm not" good/fast/smat enough etc.

Not sure on unsefulness of catecories. See page 67 details on them.

5 hinderances lead to 7 problems. A useful table of the problems and their solutions is on pg 77.  
Thses problems are:

* Procrastination and resistance to training
* Distractions, forgetting
* Impatience
* Monkey-Mind
* Self-Doubt
* Dullness, drowsiness
* Phisical discomfort

## Stage Two
### Interrupted Attention and Overcoming Mind-Wandering

__Goal:__ To change from meditation being mostly mind-wandering, interrupted by brief attention, to
mostly attention to the breath with brief periodes of mind wandering.
(Shorten periodes of mind wandering, extend periodes of sustained attention).

The main method is: appreciate the *aha moment* when you realize the mind is wandering then *gently but firmly* redirect attention back to the
breath.

Redirection attention: Do this without self-judgement, make sure to apprecite the moment.
Becoming aware of MW isn't something *you* did, it's an unconsious process, train it.

Focusing on the breath: Try to notice the sesation of the start and end of each breath.

__Monkey Mind:__ When attention jumps around rapidly. This is simmilar to mind-wandering, but a faster/more adgitated state.
Expand your attention to your boy to overcome (return to step one or two of the 4 step transition).

__Forgetting:__ forgetting the MO as well as the intention to focus on the breath. Not dealt with at this stage

__Mind-Wandering:__ after we've forgotten the mind will wander between thoughts, until we "wake-up".

__Mindfulness__ is strong when attention is accompanied by greater awareness.

Distraction -> Forgetting -> Mind-Wandering -> "Wakeing Up" -> Attention -> Distraction...

Pg 86 for review

Dealing with impatience: Don't identify with it (*I am* impatient -> impatience is arising). Seek out and acknowledge, then
focus on the feeling of, the positive aspects e.g. the body being relaxed, mind being alert, following the breath for a whole cycle.

#### Other Notes

* You shouldn't be working hard (see above on attitude).
* Don't let peripheral awareness drop away. Allow sounds, sensations, __thoughts__ and feeling to continue in the background.
* In this stage breath doesn't need to be the center at attention, it is good enough to have it in the __field of consciousness__.
* Remember: the mind is a bunch of processes going on in parallel, there is no *you* to blame.
* Can use mental words/images to help with focusing on the breath, but let them fall away when they aren't necessary. This may take untill well into stage 4.
